START HEADER
SOURCE: https://www.dailypress.com/news/science/dp-xpm-20130421-2013-04-21-dp-nws-aquaculture-report-vims-20130421-story.html
TITLE: Oyster farming down to a science
AUTHOR: Tamara Dietrich
DATE: April 21, 2013
TYPE: Article
END HEADER

On the scenic shores of Mobjack Bay in Gloucester County, oysters are being farmed by the millions.

John Vigliotta owns one of the largest caged-oyster companies in the state, taking oysters from microscopic eggs to 3-inch cage-grown market beauties in the space of a year or two. Typically, oysters can take up to three years to reach market size.

He's also one of the first to start growing oysters in cages back in the late 1990s. The move earned him the scorn of some traditional watermen, but also placed him among the forefront of Virginia's emerging commercial oyster aquaculture.

"The traditional method was where you would take seed oysters or shell and put them on the bottom, loose," Vigliotta said. "We decided to try to do it in captivity, which was kind of frowned on a little bit initially because people felt it didn't make sense to do it that way."

In a few years, he said, the concept caught on and others started doing it, too.

He's had rough patches and made mistakes along the way, he said, but is slowly building up his Ward Oyster Company and Mobjack Bay Seafood sales and distribution business. Last year, he bought the hatchery in neighboring Mathews County that had been supplying his oyster seed and is working to expand that, too.

In 2012 he harvested about 2.5 million oysters, a sizeable portion of the state's roughly 28 million aquaculture oysters that researchers say were sold that year.

The son of a Long Island duck farmer, Vigliotta sees the similarities.

"It's like planting a garden or planting a field," he said. "Stuff grows, and you harvest it. You're on the water, you're in the sun — there's not a lot of downside."

A transition underway

Shellfish aquaculture in Virginia is undergoing a gradual but growing shift from a traditional wild fishery that's existed for generations on the Chesapeake Bay to something more like farming.

And a new report from the Virginia Institute of Marine Science (VIMS) in Gloucester Point tracks that evolution.

"A significant transition to intensive aquaculture of native oysters is underway," say Thomas Murray and Karen Hudson, authors of the annual "Virginia Aquaculture Situation and Outlook Report," released last month.

Murray is a marine business specialist and Hudson an aquaculture specialist at VIMS. The survey has been conducted since 2006 to track the growth of the industry.

By surveying known oyster and clam aquaculturists in the eastern and western shores of the state, the two found that the number of eyed larvae and market oysters sold in 2012 increased, and that Virginia continues to lead the nation in the culture of hard clams.

According to the report, the 28 million Virginia aquacultured oysters sold in 2012 are an increase of 21 percent over the previous year, but slightly less than the 33 million growers had expected. It compares to 800,000 sold in 2005.

The total average sale of those cultivated oysters in 2012 was $9.5 million, or almost $3 million more than the previous year.

The average price per oyster in 2012 was 34 cents, but the price ranged between 10 cents and 95 cents.

And growers reported 66.7 million single oysters planted — a nearly 2 percent increase, but slightly less than expected. That compares to 6.2 million planted in 2005.

The report attributes the difference in expected and actual numbers to the expansion of the spat-on-shell culture, in which oyster larvae in tanks are settled onto reef balls or old oyster shells, then planted onto reefs until they're big enough to harvest. This method is considered a type of aquaculture, but isn't included in the report.

By comparison, clam farming in the state is larger and far more established. The report shows it peaking in 2007 with 589.4 million clams planted and 211.9 million sold.

In 2012, the number of market clams sold showed a 6 percent decrease over 2011, at 171 million.

But the revenue from those clams increased by nearly $1 million, at $26.8 million.

Leaps and bounds

Clams are more prolific in the higher-salinity waters of the Eastern Shore, although watermen harvest them in the Chesapeake Bay and its tributaries.

In fact, Vigliotta's company started out buying clams taken from the James River until the supply began to drop. Left with empty clam cages, he said, they decided to put oysters inside to see what would happen.

Later, he devised specialized cages, about 3-feet square and footed, that can sit on the river bottom.

Now that Vigliotta has bought the hatchery up the road in Mathews, his oysters begin as the spawn of brood stock oysters stored in tanks of seawater and fed a nutritious diet of algae grown and formulated just for them.

As microscopic eggs, they're placed 100 million at a time in a 400-gallon tank to hatch out as larvae. Maybe 70 million of them will become usable.

The larvae are fed algae, too, growing by leaps and bounds until they're separated and transferred to bigger tanks. Soon they grow into tiny oyster babies the size of grit, and are settled onto a bed of finely ground oyster shells to attach.

When they're big enough to become "eyed" larvae, they're transferred to a massive 10,000-gallon tank, which is the last stage at the hatchery before they're transferred as clutchless — or single-seed — oyster spat into floating tanks beside the company's dock in Gloucester County.

Finally, they're placed in cages and submerged half a mile out in Mobjack Bay to feast on algae in the river until they're big enough to harvest, grade, bag and sell to wholesalers, restaurants and individuals throughout the region.

Environmentally sound

Fellow commercial shellfish grower Tommy Leggett has been farming oysters on the lower bay on a much smaller scale since 1995. His business is separate from his work as an oyster restoration and fisheries scientist with the Chesapeake Bay Foundation.

"Market demand is steadily increasing, supply is increasing and productivity is increasing," said Leggett. "Which is good. It's a whole new segment to our oyster industry."

Native oysters were decimated over the years from overfishing, a polluted habitat and the effects of two parasitic diseases that are deadly to oysters but harmless to humans.

The more common form of small-scale aquaculture — buying oyster seedlings and growing them in cages, racks or floats for a year or so until they reach market size — is considered one way of easing the pressure on native oysters so they can rebuild, while also providing oysters for market.

And aquacultured oysters are typically more uniform in shape and grown for more upscale markets like raw bars or restaurants, Leggett said.

The method is also environmentally sound, since oysters are great filter feeders that help clean the water and provide habitat for other marine life. In addition, he said, oysters used in aquaculture are from strains selected for their hardiness against the parasitic diseases and their ability to mature faster.

Still, traditional watermen have been slow to embrace the aquaculture concept, Leggett said.

"Most of them still prefer the hunter-gatherer wild fishery — dragging and tonging. It's ingrained in them," he said. "We still support a wild fishery, if it's well-managed. But there's room for both."