START HEADER
SOURCE: http://www.verticalnews.com/newsletters/Ecology,-Environment-and-Conservation.html
TITLE: Investigators from University of Maine Zero in on Marine Biology (From fishers to farmers: Assessing aquaculture adoption in a training program for commercial fishers)
AUTHOR: 
DATE: November 9, 2018
TYPE: Article
END HEADER

2018 NOV 9 (VerticalNews) -- By a News Reporter-Staff News Editor at Ecology, Environment & Conservation -- New research on
Biology - Marine Biology is the subject of a report. According to news reporting from Orono, Maine, by VerticalNews journalists, research
stated, "Coastal communities in Maine are highly dependent on marine resources, especially the American lobster, Homarus
americanus H. Milne-Edwards, 1837, fishery. Overreliance on a single species poses a precarious socioeconomic situation for these
communities."
The news correspondents obtained a quote from the research from the University of Maine, "Shellfish and seaweed aquaculture is
viewed as a diversification strategy for fishers; however, the adoption of aquaculture by Maine fishers is understudied. The Aquaculture
in Shared Waters program trains commercial fishers in shellfish and seaweed aquaculture, and provides an opportunity to understand
the types of commercial fishers who are considering adoption. Here, we summarize initial findings from an ongoing longitudinal study of
training program participants that aims to understand the process of integrating fishing and farming. We utilized participant observations,
semi-structured interviews, and structured surveys to gather data on individual characteristics, motivations for considering aquaculture,
and perceptions of barriers to the adoption of aquaculture. Most fishers report being interested in aquaculture as a diversification
strategy and are most concerned about aspects of running an aquaculture operation. They report less concern about environmental
uncertainty, the regulatory process, and community relations."
According to the news reporters, the research concluded: "Initial findings will guide future inquiry with commercial fishers about
aquaculture integration, as well as provide practitioners with additional information to tailor future training."
For more information on this research see: From fishers to farmers: Assessing aquaculture adoption in a training program for
commercial fishers. Bulletin of Marine Science, 2018;94(3):1215-1222. Bulletin of Marine Science can be contacted at: Rosenstiel Sch
Mar Atmos Sci, 4600 Rickenbacker Causeway, Miami, FL 33149, USA.
Our news journalists report that additional information may be obtained by contacting C. Cleaver, Univ Maine, Sustainable Ecol
Aquaculture Network, Maine EPSCoR, Orono, ME 04469, United States. Additional authors for this research include T.R. Johnson, S.P.
Hanes and K. Pianka.
The direct object identifier (DOI) for that additional information is: https://doi-org.prxy4.ursus.maine.edu/10.5343/bms.2017.1107. This
DOI is a link to an online electronic document that is either free or for purchase, and can be your direct source for a journal article and
its citation.
Keywords for this news article include: Orono, Maine, United States, North and Central America, Marine Biology, Biology, University of
Maine.

Our reports deliver fact-based news of research and discoveries from around the world. Copyright 2018, NewsRx LLC
The citation for this news report is: NewsRx. Investigators from University of Maine Zero in on Marine Biology (From fishers to farmers:
Assessing aquaculture adoption in a training program for commercial fishers). Ecology, Environment & Conservation. November 9,
2018; p 796.