START HEADER
SOURCE: https://www.maineaquaculture.org/leasing-options/
TITLE: Leasing Options
AUTHOR: 
DATE: 2019
TYPE: Table  
END HEADER

Below is a table outlining the various permitting/leasing options in order to conduct aquaculture in Maine waters. For more information on leasing, please visit the Maine DMR web site by clicking here.

 

Type of Permission	No Permit	LPA License	Experimental Lease	Standard Lease
What can I grow	 Anything except finfish, no imports	Blue Mussels, certain clams, certain oysters	 Any species already present in Maine	 Any species already present in Maine
 How much space can I occupy?	 Any size	≤  400 sq ft of gear: length x width (e.g. a 20’x20’ raft)	Up to 4 acres, can be bottom or suspended, or both	 Up to 100 acres, can be bottom or suspended or both
How long will the lease or license last?	 N/A	 1 calendar year: all LPAs expire Dec 31 each year	 Up to 3 years, start date flexible within 1 yr. of lease decision	 Up to 20 years
 How much will it cost?	 $0	$50/year	
$100 application fee +

$100/acre/year rent

App Fee: $1,500 (shellfish), $2,000 (finfish) + Rent: $100/acre/yr +  Renewal fees in 20 yrs
What types of gear can I use?	None – bottom culture only	Certain types specified in rule, (e.g. rafts, soft bags, tray racks, lantern nets, upwellers)	Any, as long as appropriate for site	Any, as long as appropriate for site
Is my product legally protected from poaching?	No	Yes	Yes	Yes
Do I need to get a bond?	No	No	Yes	Yes
Site visit required?	No	No	Yes – but typically no dive	Yes, full site review
Will I have to have a scoping session and public hearing?	No	No – Only municipal official signature required	Maybe: it’s at DMR’s discretion or if 5 or more people request a hearing	Yes
How long will it take to get this lease or license?	N/A	After application is received at DMR, it takes a few weeks	Varies depending on whether a hearing is required and when the application is filed. Typically 3 months to a year.	Varies depending on when the application is filed and how complicated the application and issues are. Typically 8 months to two years
Renewable?	N/A	Yes	No (except for research)	Yes
Notes	Any licensed harvester can take that product. There is no exemption for undersize – so cannot possess undersize product	Good tool for nursery sites, trying new areas, relay sites, hobby or small operations. Renewed each year – town and nearby landowners can comment each year, so not guaranteed to continue from year to year.	If a standard lease application is filed more than 90 days before the expiration of the experimental lease, the experimental lease continues until DMR makes a decision on the standard lease application.	Public process is extensive, but this is the best tool for long-term operations.