START HEADER
SOURCE: https://www.maquoitbay.org/mission-2
TITLE: About Maquoit Bay Preservation Group
AUTHOR: 
DATE:
TYPE:  
END HEADER

MBPG is a group of citizens who are greatly concerned about what is being proposed as an on-water factory. This is a factory that would be complete with processing structures housed on floats, solely to help production for Mere Point Oyster Company.

Maquoit Bay’s beauty and ecology will be permanently impacted by this pollution and disturbance to the delicate ecosystem of the bay.  In the short term, we run the risk of disturbing our entire marine ecosystem. Restoring it could require the dredging of thousands of pounds of oyster, clam, scallop, and mussel debris, costing taxpayers close to a million dollars.

Our Mission
Our mission is to preserve Maquoit Bay, a noted bay of distinction, from the risk of pollutants and ocean grabbing. 

We believe local Maine business owners should choose long-term public good over short-term private interests. 

Our long term goal is to protect the bay and facilitate the establishment of responsible, fair and ecologically proven aquaculture practices. Not unproven factories that benefit one company, but may easily be sold to an out of state interest.

Mere Point Oyster Company Proposal
The permit application, states that the 40-acre floating factory will include:

Miles of cages 

Permanent barges 

Trammels 

Work platforms 

Floating buildings, with no specific limits on lighting, noise, or odors. 

The 40-acre site will be more than five times larger than the nearby Lowe’s, Walmart, and Home Depot stores combined. The cages, if placed end to end, would likely be five miles long.

The proposed area would span the shore points of Quahog Lane to Monument Lane, Brunswick corresponding to Atlantic Way to Goose Point in Freeport.

Boater navigation lanes will be blocked.  There will be noise from machinery used to tumble, pressure wash and clean the oysters and equipment on the floats.  The resulting environmental impact to the water quality, fish, lobster, clam health and shorebird populations may be devastating.  Cleaning oysters on the water could, for example have devastating effects on the population of eiders, lobsters and clams that reside in the bay. There is no evidence that this company has considered this or has any expertise or staff to manage this.

We hope you will help us stop the approval of this application. You will be amazed at the size and scope of this proposal.  There will be a formal hearing regarding this application and “in-person” participation at this meeting is vital to demonstrate the public’s objection to the factory.